---
title: "A Philosophical Case For Abortion"
date: 2020-03-06T14:10:24+02:00
draft: true
---

For a long time the abortion argument has been causing dissension in the American public. And just like the American public, the abortion arguments has morphed into an almost purely partisan issue. Pontifical pronouncements, riddled with fallacies and pathos have become to go to arguments, with each side throwing ??? accusations - left wingers have become "Baby killers" and right wingers "Sexist facists" (altough it would appear that nowadays any opinion which is not left wing is facist).

And therein lies the problem- if one side are facists and the other are baby killers, it is impossible to settle this debate. There is no middle ground, you can't only "somewhat kill a baby", you either kill a baby or not. You either support an ideology of racial superiority and genocide or not. As long as the abortion debate is "baby killers vs. facists", it cannot be solved. Fortunately, it doesn't have to be this way.

There is a way, and a rather simple one, to get back on track- using logic. If we were to turn the abortion debate into a philosophical debate, arguments like "baby killers" can't be thrown around, first they need to be proven. Arguments such as "facists" will be meaningless- it's just an ad hominem. 

## The Rules ##

In order to make this switch, we first need to agree on some groundrules:

1. **No religion.** You can't use religion in this debate for a number of reasons: 
    
    - Begging the question fallacy - in order to use religion in an arguments, you first have you prove its validity, or in other words- to prove no only the existence of god, but that your religion is the true religion out of thounsands of religions. This is a completely different debate, one which hasn't been settled for thousands of years. It would simply be replacing one unsolvable issue with another. 
    - Anyone can make up their own religion and claim it not only permits abortions but encourages them, which really infantalizes the debate.
    - You can't use an illogical idealogy (or one that is "beyond logic"), based in blind faith, a belief, in a logical debate. It contradicts the very nature of the debate.
2. **Definitions are everything.** When learning math you understand the important of the definition- you can't prove something which you cannot define. Vague definitions make it an impossible task to make a valid point. If you can't define the word baby, how can you prove that abortion is killing or not killing babies? 
Every definition has to be precise. For example, if you define a vehicle as "an something capable of moving", it's a bad definition- humans fit this description and we are not vehicles. You need to be more specific. But not two specific- "A means of carrying or transporting something which uses wheels" doesn't include trains or boats.
3. **A consice, achievable goal.** Every debate must have a predetermined, mutually agreed upon goal, and one that can be achieved. If your goal is to convice people, to be right, to prove wrong- it's a bad goal. You don't care about the truth, about the good of the women or babies, just about your feeling of superioirty. If your goal is to prove that your oponents are facists or baby killers, it's bad goals. You'll be having two simultaneous speeches, not a conversation. You simply won't be on the same page, and it's impossible to reach an agreement this way. 
You need to be open minded, willing to change your mind. You need to try and find out the truth.

## The Argument ##

After we set some groundrules, it's time to start. I feel that biggest issue with abortion is the "baby killers" argument. If abortion is really killing babies, we can't allow this to happen. There is a unanimous agreement that killing babies is wrong. However, if abortion is not killing babies, than the pro-life case essentially crumbles. 

The way I see it, the killing part is pretty obvious- you cease the life of a living creature, that's killing. And obviously there is no debate whether or not a fetus is alive as it is in essence a bunch of living cells. The problem is the baby part- it's not a baby, it's a fetus, an embryo, a zygote. A baby is what the fetus become **after birth**, not before. Therefore, you cannot abort a baby, and abortion can't be considered the killing of babies. 

However, there is a more reasonable point in this arguments- killing a fetus is the same as killing a baby. Both are human offspring and deserve the same treatment accordingly. And since human babies have a right to life, since we deem their life sacred just due to them being humans, then a fetus's life is also sacred and must be protected. It has the same rights every human has.

In order to test this assumption, I will try to define the value of human life. I will try to find out what makes a human's life so precious and sacred? Why is the sanctity of life unassailable? What makes a human's so much more important than, say, a mosquitoe's, or a dog's? 

For us to get to a precise definition of the value of human life, we'll try to narrow the group of "things" it is wrong to kill and see what makes them unique. Hopefully we'll find one or more qualities that make them special, and there we might be able to find the value of life. All of the questions assume no immediate danger to life, no abuse or torture (a swift and painless killing).

We'll start by going through a few obvious ones: Is it okay to kill a plant? Yes. Is it okay to kill a mosquitoe, or a fly? Yes. A fish? Yes. Now let's take it up a notch: what about a deer, a pig, a wild dog, a dolphin? Yes, but a lot more reluctuntely (if you're vegan and think that the answer is no, bear with me. I will address that later.). 
Now, what about a pet dog or cat? That would be a resounding no. So, there is something that makes pet dogs and cats more important, more privelged, than pretty much every other animal. Could it be the pet part? Could the reason be the right to property? I would argue not. We don't care about pet hamster nearly as much as pet dogs.

Moving on. Now I would like to approach this from a different angle: When does a person stop being himself? Let's say a good friend of your's lost a limb, an arm for example. Is he still you best friend? Is it still the same person? Yes. What about two limbs? Three? All four? Still yes. Sure, he looks different. Hanging out with him is different. But you will still see him as the same person. So we can safely say that the the quality that makes someone himself does not lie in his limbs, or more accurately, in his body (broken nose, losing an eye or ear, would lead to the same conclusion).

Let's talk about your childhood friends. When you were in grammar school or kindergarden you probably had friends. Fast forward 20-30 years and I think it's safe to assume you've lost touch about 20-30 years ago. Let's say you came across one of them, would you connect? Aside from a dull catching up conversation, you would probably have nothing in common. You won't consider each other friends anymore. Why? What happened? You two were good friends back then, how come two people just stop being friends? The answer is simple- you've changed, at least one of you (hopefully both of you). You're not the 7 year old kids you once were. You probably don't have school anymore, and if you do it's little more advanced than learning how to read (hopefully). You don't watch the same shows, you don't think that same thoughts, you behave and speak differentely. However, you probably still care about you friend. Not as much as your current friends, but you still do. 

Think of your best friend. You are probably an adult and it is less likely for you to expreince significant transformations personality-wise, making it improbable for you to drift apart. Now let's assume that your best friend start doing drugs. Heavy drugs, something like heroin or cocaine. It start as one time thing and slowly becomes an everyday thing. He can't hold a job, he can't hold relationships. He starts stealing, gambling. You stop seeing each other, lose contact. Eventually he ODs and dies. You'll miss him, you'll cry at his funeral. 

Here's the question: whom do you miss? Do you miss the drug addict? No, you don't. You miss your best friend, who didn't do any drugs. These are two different people- one was your best friend, the other a drug addict you didn't like. You reminisce of someone long gone. And it's the same with your childhood friend- you care about the kid you used to know a long, long time ago. Not the adult standing infront of you today. 

We can infer that what makes someone himself is in the mind- clearly our body is not what defines us. Changing our physical appearce, be it an amputation or a boob job, doesn't makes us someone else. But changing our mind does- changing our personality, mannerisms, opinions, values - these are the thing that define a person. If we change these in a person, we essentialy make a new person. 

"A single death is a tragedy; a million deaths is a statistic." is a famous saying, [falsely attributed to Stalin](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2010/05/21/death-statistic/), but widely accepted as a truth. The people most devestated by the Paris attacks in Nov 2015 were the French. The people most devestate by the 9/11 attacks were the Americans. The emotions Europeans felts after the 2016 Brussels bombings were a lot stronger than the those Americans felt. The closer the death to you, the harder it hits home. When you read that the total casualties of WWI is estimated at 40 million, you don't really feel much. Definitely not as much as you felt the day of the Manchester Arena bombing. 
Moreover, reading individual stories of the horrors and heroes of WWI would reulst in a stronger reaction than reading the big picture stuff. In this case, the whole is not only smaller than the sum of its parts, but every single part is bigger than the whole. We can easily see that it's not the quantity, but the quality.

But what is this quality? There is one last example that can help us understand it. If I were to tell you that someone you don't know, on the other side of the world, has died, would you care? What if I were to tell you his name, Tommy Black, father of 3, grandfather of 2, married for 30 years? You probably care a lot more. What's changed? It's the same person. He's just as dead as he was before. **What's different is that now he is part of our experience.** His life become important to us only when he became part of our existence. Just like we don't care about 40 million dead but care about every single one of those, or more accurately- the ones who were on our side. Bad guys deserve to die, we don't really care about them. We don't care that a drug addict died, but we care that our friend has died. Granted, he's been dead for a year, he died the moment he started doing drugs. But we still asociate him with his body, we still have hope that he'll come back. Just like we care about our childhood friends, despite them clearly being completely different. **We don't care about people, but of our experince of them.**

When we pull the plug, we are not bothered by killing the one who lies in this hospital bed, someone who for all intents and porpuses is already dead. In our mind, we are killing our memory of him. That what bothers us. That's also the reason why losing an arm doesn't make a different person, become our memory and experience of this person will stay the same, or at least close enough. 40 million people is too abstract, but a name, a face and a story- that's as personal as it gets. That's a memory. And a memory is part of us. The bigger this memory, the bigger the experience, the larger part of us it become, thus the more painful its death is. 

Connect to animals, dogs, dementia -> fetus doesn't affect us like murder of a stranger.